---
layout: post
title: "Paternity & Working Four Day Weeks"
date: "2021-08-25"
---

There has been a lot of articles recently on how the pandemic has changed our
working habits; flexi-work, dynamic-work, remote-first, new-normal choose your
descriptor. I think that we are going to fundamentally change how knowledge
workers view going to work. Many people have proposed that our changing work
environment means should reevaluate if the expected five-day working week is still successful
or if our new flexibility should even include changing the days we work. Studies
have tried to quantify the impact that a four-day working week has on
productivity and society at large. I'm not qualified to weigh in on that but
have worked fully remote four days a week for the last year and this is what
I've learnt.

In September last year, my wife and I welcomed our second daughter into the
world. I'm very fortunate to work for an organisation with an incredible
parental leave policy and we're given 18 weeks to spend with our new baby.
Reading the policy I saw that this didn't need to be taken in one block but
could actually be spread throughout the year after their birth. So with my
manager's and the people team's blessing, I shifted my working week to Monday to
Thursday. My role is customer-facing so I'm working both with our internal teams
as well as our customers which meant that I ended up explaining why I was not
going to be available a lot. In a nice sping one of our managers stopped referring to me being
unavailable as paternity leave but simply as "Andy does family Fridays". It was
perfect, people understood that I would not be available and I got out of the
curious conversation of why my paternity leave was one day.

Now as Scott Hanselman has pointed out that [quarantine work !== remote
work](https://www.hanselman.com/blog/quarantine-work-is-not-remote-work) there
are very different pressures and priorities on someone working remotely than
someone working remotely during the pandemic. In much the same way the first
part of my four-day week year was a blur of sleepless nights, midday nap breaks, and kid's activities. How you use that extra day available to you will massively
impact how you perceive a four-day week. Do you have a project to do?
Somewhere to go? As we crept out of lockdown and my daughter was able to do more
we've been using our Fridays as a chance to do family trips to the zoo and the beach. These days have been a great chance to squeeze extra things in that
we have been unable to do over the last year and a half.

## Lessons Learnt

Being an individual contributor shifting my working pattern had an impact on the
teams and customers I interacted with. The following points are patterns I've
tried to apply with mixed success throughout the year.
<!--more-->
### Communicate
Set expectations and stick to them. Tell people when you are and are not
going to be available. I think above all else this is the most important take
away from this year and being remote in general, over-communicate. By making
sure that the people I'm working with have a clear understanding of what they can
expect from me and when has made the entire process infinitely easier. There is
nothing worse than waiting for an action from someone and when it does arrive it
is not what you needed.

### When you are gone be gone
This one I struggled with, email, Slack,
mobile phone it's far too easy to be sucked back into work when you're interested in what
is going on. We run GSuite so I found that email push was an immense distraction
on Fridays or evenings. Sadly on Android, there is no way to set a push notification policy for just my work account.
However, I did find [Quiet for
Gmail](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.sgarcia.quiet_for_gmail)
which will enable/disable the synchronization on a custom schedule and this has
been revolutionary for me. I made a few exceptions to this rule when there was
something that needed to happen on a Friday I made sure that I could
attend. After all, it is flexible working, that flexibility goes both ways.

### Asynchronous Tooling 
Being on a different schedule to both the rest of the
teams I work with and my customers means that I often missed things that happened at
set times when I was not working. Tooling is coming to the fore here but
it needs to be lead by organisations that adopt it and make space for it in
their work. Scheduled broadcast meetings were a big one for me, there are a
bunch of calls that happen every Friday, while I didn't make a single one of
these synchronously in the last year I read each agenda and watched each part
that might be relevant on the shared recording. I never felt I missed any of the
content and was able to follow up with people as easily if I'd attended
synchronously.
Drawing the line between tasks which need everyone to be in the same place at
the same time to collaborate and those that which do not is vital. Once you know if
you need everyone at once or not you can pick the best tool for the job. The
examples below I've borrowed from a presentation given internally by [Kate Lister](https://globalworkplaceanalytics.com/about-updated)
on the future of dynamic work:

**Synchronous tasks:** 1 to 1s, complex problem solving, sensitive conversations,
social events.
**Synchronous communication channels:** video conference, telephone, instant
messaging

**Asynchronous tasks:** 1 to many, announcements, status updates, collaborative
writing.
**Asynchronous communication channels:** email, recorded meetings,
collaborative documents

### Pre-planning
Reducing my available working time by a fifth means I spent fewer total
hours dedicated to work but it didn't mean my output had to drop by the same
amount. One of the things I was most careful of was pre-planning my
time to prioritize the things that mattered most. What does
tomorrow look like? What are the targets for the week? Next week? Having a clear picture of
what time I had available and setting clear goals and time boxes to achieve them
was invaluable. This clear plan of what I'm working on is available in my shared
calendar, anyone I was working with could easily grab free slots with me. If
something came up last minute that required immediate action a quick shuffle of
those blocks of time made room to accommodate last-minute tasks.

## Moving back to the five day week

As my daughter turns one I'll return to the five-day working week, will I
miss my family Fridays? Absolutely. I'm very lucky to have been able to spend so
much extra time with my family this year. Having the flexibility to spread my
paternity leave through the year meant I was able to strike a better work life
balance and enjoy both sides all the more. Four-day weeks have changed how I
view work. Moving more tasks towards asynchronous behaviour and better
pre-planning allowed me to make better choices about what is important to do
with the time I had available and what impact I want to have. Neither of these
actions require the drastic change of moving to a four day working week and are
without doubt the biggest force multiplier I have yet found.